http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/events/newsnight/1372220.stm

Prime Minister, there aren't enough doctors or nurses. There aren't enough
teachers. There are more cars on the road than when you came to power. The
train service doesn't work. Violent crime is rising. Is that what you meant by
the new Britain?


You said "over the five years of a Labour Government, we will rebuild the NHS."


But you said "over the five years of a Labour Government we will rebuild the
NHS." Did you underestimate the task?


Why say you could do it in five years?


You said you would rebuild the NHS in five years.


Why did you say it?


It's in the manifesto.


It was a mistake to say it then?


You said "we WILL" rebuild the NHS in five years.


Over the five years of a Labour Government. It says so.


But you did pledge to...


But you did pledge to rebuild the NHS in five years. You accept that hasn't
happened. You've made a start on it.


Are you still committed to reaching the European average on health spending by
2003/2004?


I said that by the end of the second Comprehensive Spending Review, I wanted to
reach the European average.


When is that?


We are talking about 2006/2007?


That would be the intention - to reach the European average at that date, not
the European average at the time you made the promise?


It's a promise firmly...


So it's just an aspiration?


Yes. ..


But it is a firm commitment that by 2006/7, if the European average is 8% or
9%, it will be that in this country unless we have had economic collapse?


Strong is a relative judgment.


I assume you believe the economy will remain strong?


Can we look then at your longer term plans? There are proposals in here, and
everybody understands that this is a longer term project you are embarked upon,
but the plans here stretch ten years. So not just this government but the next
government?


But your budget plans only extend to 2003/4. Do you accept that at that point
you'll have to cut spending plans or you will have to raise taxes?


So, it can be squared, this circle?


You talk in the latest manifesto for this election about using the private
sector to support public endeavour in the public services. What do you think
the private sector could do that can't be done by the public sector?


You have been talking about a radical second term.


You are now talking about more of the same.


But when you talk about the spirit of entrepreneurship entering into the public
services, does that indicate that you made a mistake in reversing many of the
Conservatives' divisions between providers and purchasers, for example, or GP
fund-holders?


Yes.


How will it manifest itself then?


What is the model here, Railtrack? No, It's not. We opposed rail privatisation
and we are not following that in any of the work with the private sector we are
doing.


What is the model then?


A lot of people who work in the public sector have asked me - will you ask the
Prime Minister why he is so in love with the private sector?


But don't you remember your remarks about scars on your back?


Let me ask you a question about


Do you think that a company can make too much in profits?


Do you think profits can be ever unjustifiably large?


Do you believe that an individual can earn too much money?


But where is the justice in taxing someone who earns £34,000 a year, which is
about enough to cover a mortgage on a one-bedroom flat in outer London, at the
same rate as someone who earns £34 million. Where is the justice?


I am asking you about the rate of tax.


But where is the justice in it?


But Prime Minister, the gap between rich and poor has by widened while you have
been in office.


..Benefiting more!


But is it acceptable for gap between rich and poor to widen?


So it is acceptable for gap to widen between rich and poor?


That is not my question.


So the answer to the straight question is it acceptable for gap between rich
and poor to get wider, the answer you are saying is yes.


You are not saying no.


You may not think it is the issue, but it is the question. Is it OK for the gap
to get wider?


With respect, people see you are asked a straightforward question and they see
you not answering it.


But you are not answering it.


Is it acceptable for gap between rich and poor to get bigger?


I understand what you are saying. The question is about the gap.


But you're not answering it.


You are answering another question.


Let's talk about tax. You have promised¿


I assume you want to be Prime Minister. I just want to be an interviewer. Can
we stick to that arrangement?


You promised that you won't raise the basic level of income tax and won't raise
the higher rate of income tax. You have conceded that national insurance is a
tax based upon income. Why won't you¿


Why won't you give a guarantee about national insurance?


Why are you prepared to make a guarantee about income tax?


But you also gave an assurance on national insurance, not in the manifesto, but
Gordon Brown gave it, that the ceiling wouldn't be raised


Why could you do it last time and not this time?


No you are not. With the greatest of respect, last time you promised the
ceiling on national insurance would not be raised, or the Chancellor did.


I'm only asking about national insurance.


I am merely asking you why you could give this guarantee last time but you
can't give it this time and whether any reasonable person wouldn't suppose that
you therefore propose to increase national insurance contributions.


Why not?


Isn't it intellectually incoherent to say what you will do with one tax and not
another tax, which is levied on almost the same basis?


Wouldn't a reasonable person conclude that the reason you don't wish to say it
is because you plan to raise it?


I am not asking you to write a budget.


I am asking about national insurance contributions.


All right. Let's talk about the euro. Famously, there are five tests, which
have to be met before we can join the euro. Gordon Brown has said the Treasury
will be the custodians of those tests. Can you overrule the Treasury?


But the Treasury are the custodians of the test?


So Gordon Brown decides when they would be met?


So Gordon Brown decides whether we have a referendum or not?


The Treasury decides whether the tests are met?


And Gordon Brown is the man who will make that judgment?


A re we to take it that the agriculture secretary, the culture secretary and so
on will have a view on whether these tests have been met?


But essentially you are rubber stamping Gordon Brown's decision?


But he decides whether the tests have been met or not?


You will rubber stamp it then?


This takes us to the whole question of your judgment, Prime Minister.


You haven't made that judgment and clearly you will exercise your judgment on
that. Let's take a couple of examples of your judgment. Keith Vaz shouldn't be
sacked from his job because he hasn't been guilty of anything. Why did you sack
Peter Mandelson?


Which were?


He didn't do anything wrong. The inquiry found he did nothing wrong.


Do you still think he misled you?


It's not entirely closed. This is a man who is a close and trusted ally of
yours. I suggest to you you panicked.


But he didn't do anything wrong.


So why did you sack him?


So why didn't you sack Keith Vaz?


Keith Vaz is a good minister?


You talked about him in the past tense "has been".


Is he in your next government?


When we look at some of these matters, particularly Mr Mandelson and Mr Vaz,
essentially their mistake was to cosy up to the Hinduja brothers. Why should
they be¿have anything done against them for that when you have done the same
thing.


But Peter Mandelson isn't?


Of course there was not. He was cleared in the inquiry. Yet you sacked him.


But these letters from you to the Hinduja brothers, two men with something of a
cloud over them in India, you are comfortable with all of those, are you,
"yours ever, Tony"?


Would you take money from them again?


Do you think it's appropriate your party takes money from people with a shadow
over them like that in India?


Would you be happy if they did?


So the answer would be yes?


Can we look at the campaign. When you look back to the launch of that campaign
at St Olave's and St Xavier's school, how soon did you realise it was a
mistake?


Come on! Seriously, there must have been a point where you are there in front
of the stained glass windows and you thought you were the vicar of St Albions!


No - it was an audience of teenage girls. What have they got to do with
negative equity? It was a mistake, wasn't it?


You don't regret it? You weren't embarrassed?


You didn't see the comical side of it?


It's nice Gordon Brown to take the rap for it?


Yes, he has.


On the subject of Gordon Brown, is he your natural successor?


I assume you will be leader of the Labour Party.


You make him sound like the heir apparent.


When you have been fighting this campaign, there hasn't been a point where you
haven't been ahead. Have you ever felt the slightest twinge of sympathy for
poor old William Hague?

talk about sympathy¿ PAXMAN As leader of a party, presented as the underdog
throughout the campaign.


That you don't agree with!


With the greatest of respect, we have spoken to him about Conservative
policies, we don't need to talk to you about them.


Could you ever have too big a majority?


You have a majority of 179 in the last parliament.


Could you have too big a majority after this election?


I am not asking you to speculate but this is a straightforward question. Could
you have too big a majority?


Could too many of them decide to vote for you?


I am!


Is it a danger having too big a majority?


No, you haven't had the election yet!


I'm merely asking you, Prime Minister, whether you think there is any danger of
having too big a majority.


For the health of democracy, you don't think there is a question at issue here
about how big a majority is healthy?


Prime Minister, thank you very much.
