# Trumpasaurus - word usage analysis of political speeches

## Motivation

I started this purely out of curiosity to see if Theresa May was really
repeating herself a lot. But by way of comparison I quickly extended it to other
speakers. I also wondered if I could capture "the essence" of a piece without
actually having to read it.

It was originally called Theresaurus - which looks cool - but Trumpasaurus is
much more enjoyable to say.

## Installation

Trumpasaurus must be served by a web server.

Like this one: https://deanturpin.github.io/trumpasaurus/

During dev you can run one locally with python (one level up from your repo)
```bash
python -m SimpleHTTPServer
```

And connect with your web browser: http://0.0.0.0:8000/trumpasaurus/

## Testing

Tested this on recent Firefox, Safari and Chrome on the desktop. Chrome and
Safari on iPhone.

## Adding a new speech

This can be done entirely within github.

- Fork this repo
- Add a new text file in speeches
- In index.html: add a new option in the select tag with the new file
- In your repo settings: select "master" branch as the source in the GitHub
	Pages section
- View it on your github.io

### Preprocessing

Conversations need preprocessing to split them into separate files. I used the
```tools/split-speech.sh``` script. I've left the speeches largely untouched
unless some anomalies jump out of the results. The PDF to text conversion of the
Lib Dem manifesto for example was littered with ●●  - an artifact of the PDF to
text conversion - so I removed them by hand (in vim).

Keyword counts were generated by running the ```keywords.sh``` script in the
speeches folder. Pass it a list of files to compare.

```bash
$ cd speeches
$ ../tools/keywords.sh 
Conserv	SinnFei	DUP	Labour	Green	UKIP	Libdem	
 	 	 	1	 	 	 	abortion
 	 	 	1	 	 	 	badger
 	 	 	 	 	6	 	blair
8	7	1	25	2	42	23	brexit
 	 	1	 	 	1	 	cameron
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	clegg
 	 	 	14	6	5	12	climate
28	4	6	66	11	21	68	community|communities
41	 	 	68	 	17	32	conservative
 	 	 	1	 	1	3	corbyn
13	1	2	23	 	25	15	crime
8	 	6	4	 	1	2	cyber
2	 	2	7	1	5	4	debt

```

Converting manifesto PDFs to text
```bash
$ pdftotext DUP_Wminster_Manifesto_2017_v5.{pdf,txt}
```
